in this video let us learn how to delete a
node from a linked list
So this is the code to implement this programme
So we have a function delete to perform this task
So here we have a linked list of nodes with
values 10 20 and 30
But 10 is the head of the linked list
So you will have to delete a particular key
So firstly what you want to do is find the
key in the linked list and then delete it
So we have two cases here
If the head node is the key to be deleted
and if it is not so here we are going
to delete 10 from the linked list
So let us call the function delete by passing the key to
be deleted and first letters check
If the data in head node is the key to
be deleted so write if head dot data equal to
key
And here we have 10 which is same as the
So simply make the second node the head of the
linked list so write head equal to head next
So the key temp is deleted from this linked list
null let us take the same example again
But this time the key to be deleted is 20
So first of all we need to check if head
dot data equal to key
But it is not which means the Key to be
deleted is not the head and we need to find
it
So we go to the else spot and we need
to traverse the entire linked list check every nodes data
and if it is key than delete it
So first declare another variable temp and initialised it to
head node So write node temp equal to head
null we traverse the linked list using a while Loop
so write while temp next not equal to null
So this while loop execute till the end of the
linked list or till we reach the last node where
node
Next will be Null an inside
We need to check if the next node is the
key
If so make this node point to the second next
node
That is write
If temp next data equal to key than temp next
equal to tempt next next and since the deletion is
completed break out of the loop
null if it is not key simply move to the
next node and repeat the process so write temp equal
to temp
Next let us see how it works
We have key equal to 20 and temp is pointing
to head initially
null when we checked the while condition we have temp
next equal to 2024 which is not equal to
null
So the condition is true
So we check
If temp next data equal to key and it is
that is in the first iteration we have temp equal
to head
So TEMP next will be the second node and its
data equal to 20 which is same as the key
So the if condition is true
So simply make this current node that is temp point
to its second next node
So here in this case node one will have to
point to the third node so that the second node is
deleted
So the key 20 is null removed from the linked
list and this is the resultant linked list after deletion
and null we can break out of the loop
null let us see another case
Let us delete the last element of the linked list
So take the same example and key to be deleted
Be 30 first we check if head equal to key But
it is not ten is not equal to 30 So
we go to the else part and declared temp and
initialised it to head
And we traverse the linked list until we reach the
last node using the while loop
And we have temp next equal to 2024 which
is not equal to null
So the condition is true
So we go inside and check If the next node
is having the key 30
But it is not so that if condition failed here
So we go to the else part and we have
temp equal to temp next attempt will now point to
the next node
now in the next iteration we have temp next equal
to 3024 which is again not equal to null
So the condition is true
So ender the while loop and check If TEMP next
data equal to key and temp next equal to 3024
here and its data equal to 30 which is
equal to the key
So the if condition is true here
So we need to make TEMP next equal to temp
Next
Next and what is temp next Next It is null
so that will be stored in temp next so it
will no longer point to node 30
But there is only null in the next part
So the node 30 is remote from the linked list
and now we can break out of the loop
So this is how we can perform deletion in a
linked list
now let us relate this with the train scenario
We have the engine followed by the other coaches just
like head followed by other nodes in a linked list
So in first case let us delete A which is
engine so removed the engines and make be the
new engine
now that it's delete C so first we need to
find C so engine is not C
First Coach is also not C
And yes the second coach is C
So we have found C null remove C and make
B directly connected to D
So that is how it works
now let us discuss about the time complexity of this operation
Actually the time complexity of deleting a node is order
of one
But it is the time taken to find the node
first so the best case time complexity will be when
the node to be deleted is the head of the
linked list
So it will be order of one and the worst
case will be when the node to be deleted is
the last node of the linked list
Then we need to traverse the whole linked list to
find it and then only we can delete it
So if we have n nodes than the worst case time to delete is order of n.